# Standard ML of New Jersey

This is the main development repository for **SML/NJ**.  We are
currently reworking many components of the system, so it is not
very stable.  For most uses, we recommend the
[legacy version](https://github.com/smlnj/legacy) of the system.

As of the 2025.1 release, this version is known to work on AMD64
(a.k.a. x86-64) hardware running **Linux** or **macOS**, and on
Arm64 (a.k.a. AArch64) hardware running **macOS**.

---

## Contents

- [Dependencies](#dependencies)
- [Building From Source](#building-from-source)
- [Recompiling the System](#recompiling-the-system)

---

## Dependencies

To build the system from sources, you must have several common software
systems installed on your machine.[^1]

* **C++17** -- You need a **C++** compiler, such as **clang** or **gcc**,
  that can handle **C++17**.

* **CMake** -- You need Version 3.23 or later of [CMake](https://cmake.org).

* **Autoconf** -- Parts of the documentation and the **ASDL** tool require
  the GNU **autoconf** tool (version 2.71 or later).

[^1]: We provide installer packages for **macOS** that avoid these dependencies.

## Building From Source

The process for building the system from source code has changed from the
legacy system.

1. Set `VERSION` to the version of **SML/NJ** that you want to build;
   for example
   ``` bash
   VERSION=2025.2
   ```

2. Clone the repository
    ``` bash
    git clone --depth 1 --branch v$VERSION --recurse-submodules https://github.com/smlnj/smlnj.git
    ```
    The `--depth` option limits the download to just one commit (*i.e.*, no
    history), the `--branch` option specifies the version of the source
    code that you are requesting, and the `--recurse-submodules` option is
    necessary to fetch the customized version of the **LLVM** library that we
    use.

3. build the installation
    ``` bash
    cd smlnj
    ./build.sh
    ```
    Use `build.sh -h` to see the list of options accepted by the build script.

    As of version 2025.1, the `build.sh` script will download the pre-compiled
    boot files if they are not present.

    As before, you can modify the [`config/targets`](config/targets) file to
    add/remove components from the build.

After successful running of the [`build.sh`](build.sh) script, `bin/sml` will
be the interactive system.

## Recompiling the System

The process of recompiling the system from source code is fairly similar
to before.

1. Switch to the [`system`](system/) directory and run the `cmb-make` command:
    ``` bash
    cd system
    ./cmb-make ../bin/sml
    ```

    The "`../bin/sml`" argument is optional; if omitted, then the `sml`
    command in the user's `PATH` will be used.  One can also specify
    a different path to an `sml` command, when appropriate.

2. Bootstrap the system
    ``` bash
    ./makeml
    ```

3. Install the system
    ``` bash
    ./installml -clean -boot
    ```
    The `-boot` option is new (and optional); it causes the existing boot files
     in the root directory (*e.g.*, `boot.amd64-unix.tgz`) to be replaced by
    the files generated by the `cmb-make` command.

4. Rebuild the libraries and tools
    ``` bash
    cd ..
    ./build.sh
    ```
